From The New York Times, I'm Michael
Barbaro.
This is The Daily.
>> [music]
>> On [music] Wednesday, American officials
conceded what's become increasingly
clear from investigative reporting by
The Times [music]
that the United States military was
responsible for the airstrike [music]
that destroyed an elementary school in
Iran
killing at least 175
people,
>> [music]
>> most of them small children.
Today,
>> [music]
>> my colleagues Malachy Browne and Julian
Barnes on what led to one of the most
devastating military errors in [music]
decades.
>> [music]
>> It's Thursday, March 12th.
Malachy, it feels like in a very real
sense you were among the first people in
the world, perhaps outside the military,
to understand that this devastating
airstrike was likely carried out by the
United States.
A determination that has
now been confirmed preliminarily by an
American military investigation.
Well, Michael, I'm not sure about that,
but we suspected that something went
terribly wrong as soon as we started
looking at it.
Well, now that this is no longer a
suspicion but something that feels so
more or less firm,
I want to go back to when this all
happened because the timing of it is
important. It happened around the same
moment that the US and Israel killed
Iran's supreme leader and all the
world's eyes were on that. And this
other airstrike was more or less in
parallel, but getting a lot less
attention
at first. But once we all realized what
had happened,
it was shocking. This was a elementary
school blown up by a missile, and 175
civilians, mostly children, were killed.
So, I just want to talk for a moment
about the scale of this.
Yes, it has devastated Minab, the town
where the school was located.
Saturday morning is the start of the the
week and the school week in Iran. So,
school was in session. The teachers
union there said that over 260 students
were in the school at the time. Wow. And
most of these kids are age 7 to 12. And
according to health officials and the
local governor there,
most of them were killed in the strike
along with teachers.
And it really is
is absolutely horrific what has
happened.
Right. It's kind of hard
to fathom just how many lives were
affected by this. It's just an enormous
tragedy. It's absolutely uh hard to
understand and to put yourself in the in
their position. I mean, Minab is a small
town in in southern Iran.
This has affected the entire community
there. Obviously, the direct relatives,
but just the pictures coming out of
there of the streets thronged for the
funerals of these children and and their
teachers
are really heartbreaking.
You know, there are pictures of
mothers throwing themselves over the
open coffins of their children as
they're saying goodbye to them. Scores
of coffins brought in a procession
through the streets.
You know, people [snorts] throwing rose
petals at them, showering them with
sweets. There were thousands of people
out there, and of course, that aerial
photograph that many listeners may have
seen of the freshly dug graves, 100 of
them in a plot in a cemetery just five
miles away from the school. It kind of
spoke to the scale of the loss for the
community there. Mhm. And whatever
happened here, it was clearly one of the
most devastating incidents in an
American war in decades.
Which is why you and a team of people on
the visual investigations desk here in
our newsroom set about trying to get to
the bottom of what happened and and why
it happened and who was responsible. Can
you talk us through what you did from
the very beginning to figure that out?
>> [snorts]
>> Well, the incident was flagged to us by
our colleagues in International. There
was a video circulating
uh showing the immediate aftermath of
the school building reportedly struck
and people rummaging through the rubble
outside, smoke billowing from it.
So, the first challenge was to verify
that the building that we were seeing in
videos of the aftermath of the strike
was in fact a school and then where it
is.
In the video, you can see, you know,
bright pastel colored walls with
paintings drawn by children. Other
images were taken from the inside of the
building that showed classroom settings
and also colorful drawings. So, it
looked like a school from the outset.
And [snorts] then secondly, where is it?
We're not in Manab and I never have been
there.
>> You're in fact in Ireland.
>> Yeah, I'm in outside Limerick in
Ireland.
But we have access to satellite imagery,
recent satellite imagery of Manab and
I'm able to look around the area and
see, you know, find schools that are
identified in Google Earth and whatnot.
This one actually wasn't marked on
Google Earth, but we had heard that it
was near a military base. And so, by
finding the military base, we were able
to identify building and then compare
the contours of that building, the size
of it, the trees around it with what we
were seeing in the video. And the video
was clearly taken at that location and
showed the school. Mhm. And then in the
satellite imagery, there were all other
details that suggested to us that this
was a school. You could see a hopscotch
area, other play areas marked on the
asphalt there as sports fields beside
it. And I suppose one of the things was
that, you know, one of the most striking
things for us was that
around the school
amid the rubble, you could see school
books and small [music] little school
bags and backpacks and
bright shoes of children who attended
the school. And then parents rifling
through
>> [music]
>> these books Mhm. to see if if if it
belonged to their loved one.
Well, from the images you're describing,
it's quite obviously a school with
children actively attending it.
>> [music]
>> And so, in theory, that should be
obvious to whoever struck it. And
[music] the question is why wasn't it
obvious? Why was it hit? And who did it?
That's right. Well,
we were also able to determine that it
was located beside
a naval base of the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps, which is
Iran's most powerful military. And it
was once a part of it. We could see in
uh historic satellite imagery that
back in 2013, the building that the
school was in was once encompassed
within that broader rectangular military
base. Mhm. Yeah. And then by 2016, it
was walled off. The area was cleared,
watchtowers were removed, public
entrances were opened into it, and the
ground was cleared for playing areas. It
was painted all these bright colors so
it had become, you know, it [snorts] it
looked like a school. And definitely was
used for civilian purposes.
But it was sitting right beside a
military site, and they were being
targeted in these early hours of the war
on Iran. So so knowing that at this
point you're still very early on your
investigation,
what does this suggest exactly to you?
The fact that 10 years ago it was part
of an IRGC military complex.
It's suggested that this might be a
massive intelligence failure and
somebody identified a school as being a
legitimate military target because we
could see from other videos that we also
verified that buildings inside in the
base had been hit and by timelining out
all of those reports we knew that the
school and the base were hit around the
same time. So it looked like that
opening wave of attacks mistakenly hit
the school alongside the military
targets in the base.
Just to get this out of the way, did
anything suggest that even if this has
been a school for the past 10 years that
the IRGC was using any part of the
building as a military facility? No,
there there was there was no evidence of
any military function in that school
compound.
So then how do you go about determining
which one of the combatants in this
conflict strikes this quite clearly
school? Because it feels like there's
two obvious candidates, the United
States or Israel, but of course I'm
guessing you can't entirely discount the
possibility because this has happened in
previous Middle Eastern conflicts
and all conflicts that perhaps Iran
itself may have misfired and been
responsible for this. Absolutely. That
was a possibility in the early stages of
the investigation. And part of it was
trying to identify what was hit in the
base, how it was hit. Were these precise
strikes? Were there craters littering
the base? We couldn't look inside it and
it's not open to the public and so there
were no videos emerging from there but
we have access to satellite imagery
providers and so we ordered a
high-resolution image that would give us
a look inside the base and and see what
damage was wrought and how.
>> And and what did that reveal?
So it showed that several buildings had
been destroyed very tightly by precise
strikes. And you could even see that
there were holes punched through right
the center of these large warehouses and
buildings inside in the military base.
And the school also was hit. You could
see that more than half of it had been
destroyed. There was a white gaping hole
almost circular in in shape. And so that
indicated that these buildings were hit
with precision-guided missiles. And
that's characteristic of Israeli and US
capabilities, but it's also
characteristic of intelligence planning
to take out infrastructure ahead of time
in these early strikes hitting the
country. Got it. So this was not
accidental based on what you're seeing
at that point and probably not a
byproduct of some other strike. It's not
a case, it seems, of shrapnel from one
strike hitting the school based on what
you just described. And so it feels like
Iran in your mind
is being taken out of the category of
likely candidate. And so now you're left
with Israel and the US. So how do you
figure out which of those two are
responsible?
Awesome questions. A spokesperson for
the Israel Defense Forces said that day
afterwards, on the Sunday, that they
weren't operating in the area at that
time. Mhm. My colleague Aaron questions
US Central Command and they said their
investigation was ongoing. So we didn't
get much information from them.
However, on Wednesday of last week and
with that, I turn it over to the
chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary, and good
morning, everyone. There was a press
conference with Secretary Pete Hegseth
and General Dan Kaine, the Joint Chiefs
Chairman. Let me flip to the map here.
And General Kaine held up a map showing
the US and Israeli operations in the
first 100 hours of the conflict.
And using a laser pointer he swung by
the south of Iran and he said the US was
primarily striking targets in the south.
Uh ballistic missile capabilities as
well as integrated air defense
capabilities along the southern axis.
Along the northern axis Israel and the
Israeli Air Force has predominantly been
working And Israel was operating in the
north and the west. And even on that map
there was a strike location and that
strike location is in the area around
Manama.
So from what
Israeli officials were saying and what
General Dan Keane was saying and based
on the type of weaponry used the
evidence was pointing more and more
towards a US strike. Right, because the
school is in the south of Iran. That's
right Michael and then we obtained this
really critical piece of video evidence.
It was filmed across the street from the
naval base at a construction site and it
shows a missile coming in not hitting
the school but hitting the base.
And in the milliseconds before impact
you can see the silhouette of the weapon
against the blue sky which opens the
possibility of identifying what type of
weapon this is. Now Trevor Ball who's a
weapons expert with the research group
Bellingcat
he identified it as a Tomahawk missile
and we also did. We spoke to other
weapons experts and my colleague John
Ismay who himself is a weapons expert
analyzed it and based on the dimensions
and the design of it it was clearly a
Tomahawk cruise missile and that's
significant because the only party in
this war with Tomahawks is the United
States.
And so the evidence is really pointing
towards US culpability. Right. missile
strike and a Tomahawk missile likely
destroyed that Iranian girls school. So
will the Americans the US accept any
responsibility? Will I have to say
>> seen it. And then at a news conference
on Monday, President Trump positive the
idea that Iran fired the Tomahawk. Iran
is used by, you know, is sold and used
by
other countries, you know that.
And whether it's Iran, who also has some
Tomahawks, they wish they had more. Yet
once again, despite all the information
we have.
>> Yeah, like we don't know where he's
getting his information from. And our
colleague Shawn McCreesh, who covers the
White House for the Times,
is there and asks President Trump You
just suggested that Iran somehow got its
hands on a Tomahawk and bombed its own
elementary school on the first day of
the war. But you're the only person in
your government saying this. Even your
defense secretary wouldn't say that when
he was asked standing over your shoulder
on your plane on Saturday. Why are you
the only person saying this?
>> Cuz I just don't know enough about it. I
think it's something that I was told is
under investigation. And President Trump
says, "Well, we're waiting for the
results of an investigation. And if the
investigation finds that it's us, I'm
willing to live with that."
>> Uh but I will certainly, whatever the uh
report shows, I'm willing to live with
that report.
Which is in a couple of days, precisely
what starts to happen. Correct?
>> [music]
>> Officials that our colleagues in
Washington, D.C. spoke to, who are close
to the investigation, [music] say that
the preliminary findings
find that the US is responsible for the
school strike.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Well, Malachy,
thank you very much. [music] We
appreciate it. Thanks, Michael.
>> [music]
>> After the break,
my colleague, Julian Barnes,
>> [music]
>> on exactly what the US government
investigation has found.
We'll be right back.
Julian, you and a team of our colleagues
at the times broke the story on
Wednesday morning that a preliminary
investigation by the US government has
determined that the United States
military was responsible for
the airstrike on this elementary school
that we have been talking about with
Malachy. So, tell us what you've come to
understand about that investigation.
Well, what we've learned is that the US
officials who have been looking into
this have come to the conclusion that
the US was responsible. Mhm. The
military
took old information and used it to make
the targets on the day of the strike.
And they did not update the data. They
did not verify it and realize
what we've all come to know now that
this became a school a decade or more
ago.
Right. And 10 years is a very long time
ago. So, you're suggesting that whether
it was maps or coordinates, what exactly
was it that they were using that was
this outdated? So,
the Defense Intelligence Agency is one
of the agencies that gathers information
and they do it from maps and they do it
from other pieces of data and they they
put it into a big database that they
will push forward. As basically a target
list. As a target list or what you will
draw your target list from, right?
>> Mhm. Making a target is a a complicated
process. And that's the next stage of
the military investigation to figure out
did the verification not take place? Did
it fail to reveal the truth? Where did
that process break down? Because there's
old data that's entered all the time,
and there are safety nets that are meant
to catch it. But it they didn't catch it
in this place.
>> I I do think we should linger for a
moment on how seemingly straightforward
verification would have been. And I say
that because our colleague Malachy used
commercially available satellite photos
to determine
that this was a school. And that's not
to mention the fact that the US has
drones and planes capable of monitoring
a place like a school from very far away
and determining, even if the original
data was 10 years old, who's coming in
and out of a building. And that work
might not have taken very long. And so
it gets hard to understand how the US
military could only be relying on
10-year-old data without doing any of
the very simple forms of follow-up that
would have shown that it was out of
date. The system for picking targets and
verifying targets is very complex. There
is supposed to be a double-check. There
is supposed to be a triple-check. You
get data from the Defense Intelligence
Agency. You cross-check it with
satellite imagery from the National
Geospatial Intelligence Agency, the
people who look at the satellite
pictures. You have all kinds of computer
programs that are supposed to help you,
the analyst, do this. You have AI that's
supposed to review it. You have your own
expertise. And then the intelligence
officer is supposed to take it and then
give it to the operations officer who is
hopefully doing a last check that it is
what they say it is. There are levels
built into the system that are supposed
to catch this. But, we are in an era
when they want the military to move
fast, they want the military to be
willing to break things,
and
the system of checks broke down. We do
not fully know how and when, but the
bottom line is 10-year-old data was used
and it resulted in a catastrophe. I I
want to zero in on something you said
cuz it does feel important. We now have
a defense secretary in Pete Hegseth who
routinely talks about how cumbersome old
processes were, is dismissive of the old
rules, and very focused on lethality. I
mean, he literally said,
"No more
rules of engagement." So,
is there an understanding, and perhaps
at this point it's an assumption rather
than a determination, that that ethos
played a role here? So, this is the
question I am asking, this is the
question my colleagues are asking, it's
the obvious question.
Secretary of Defense Pete Hegseth has
been saying that these rules are too
cumbersome, that they make a weak, woke
military, right?
So, this is the environment that the US
military is operating in. That said, we
do not have reporting that the
elimination of the civilian casualty
rules played a part here. Right.
I'm curious, Julian, what you think,
based on your many years covering
these kinds of incidents,
what accountability might look like in a
case like this? Do you think that it's
likely anyone will be fired for this?
Will there be any effort
to hold individuals or an entire chain
of command responsible? Will there be
any effort to compensate the families of
those killed? I mean, compensation's a
very inadequate word given that we're
talking about small children who were
killed. But, what do you think happens
as a result of this? In a different
administration, this would have been
handled in the complete opposite way,
right? We would be
having a president not blaming the
opponent. We would not have a president
rushing to judgment. And then, you'd
have the US looking to potentially make
an apology, potentially to do
compensation to the families. In
Afghanistan, there was regular
compensation when civilians were wrongly
targeted or when there was a civilian
casualty in an otherwise correct
military operation.
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> But, this is a very different
administration. They do not like to
apologize. This is not the kind of thing
that gets you fired. On the other hand,
we still have a professional military.
They operate under ethos. They do
investigations. And so, there will be
a measure of lessons learned,
accountability. The military will try to
prevent this from happening again.
What we know is that President Trump, in
response to a question from our
colleague Shawn McCreesh, said that he
would go along with the findings of this
investigation. And so, I'm curious what
if anything he or the White House has
said about what you have all learned
this investigation preliminarily has
found. Well, Carolyn Levitt, the press
secretary, in her statement to us, you
know, emphasized that these are
preliminary
findings.
But, later in the day
As President Trump was walking to Marine
One, he stopped to talk to the reporters
there and and one of them shouted out a
question about our story.
That is what? The what you
You could see him take a step back.
And then he said, "I don't know about
that." It was a kind of a distancing
from the story.
So, I don't know if we can expect Donald
Trump to engage with these findings or
the final military investigation. It is
a uncomfortable subject. It is not the
kind of example of winning that he wants
to talk about.
Julian, you had mentioned a few moments
ago Afghanistan. And the reality is that
what happened here, the idea that the US
would make a mistake and that it would
kill civilians, it's not a new
phenomenon. We talk about it a lot on
the show. War right now, as the United
States largely conducts it, is from the
air and it's through drones or warships
firing missiles from very far away,
which is what we think happened in the
case of this school.
And the idea is that it insulates
American soldiers from harm that would
come from being on the ground. But, the
risks are now very plain and we somewhat
regularly as a military kill civilians
because we aren't close enough to the
targets to understand who's there. That
was especially true a few years back and
we did an episode about it when the US
military killed a man in Afghanistan who
we believed was a suspect of an attack
when in fact he was an aid worker and we
killed nine members of his family
including his seven children. Is this
form of modern American warfare just
going to be far more error-prone?
No matter what war you're in, there are
going to be errors, there are going to
be human errors, there are going to be
machine errors.
You can't get away from mistakes in
warfare.
But what you say is true, right? If this
was a different kind of war, we would
have had a spotter on the ground. They
are that ultimate check. And that person
would have said, "Wait, there are school
children here. There are playgrounds
here. This is not the right target." And
when you are at a remove, hundreds of
miles away, firing Tomahawk missiles,
making orders from half a world away in
Tampa, Florida, like you are at a remove
from the battlefield, and that does
create an opportunity for these kind of
errors.
Just to end our conversation here,
Julian,
it is very hard to say what will
ultimately define any war, and we are
now a week and a half into this one. A
lot could happen, but it feels like a
mistake of this magnitude
with the death of so many innocent
children
feels like it will be remembered on all
sides as a signature moment of this war.
How do you think that this
mistake, this tragedy, this killing of
all of these children at this elementary
school in the
early hours of this war
is going to be remembered?
When you think about this war,
you know that
no matter what policy goals are achieved
in this war, the death of the supreme
leader, the weakening of the Iranian
regime, or the elimination [music]
potentially of its nuclear program,
whatever is to come,
this war is still going to be
remembered,
defined
by this mistake as [music] well. It's
too big an error. [music] It's too big a
tragedy. And
if we think back on [music] other
American wars,
we do think of the things that go
[music] wrong, right?
>> Mhm.
If we go back to Vietnam, we think of
the My Lai Massacre, we think of the use
of napalm that [music] killed children.
If we go to the Iraq war, [music] we
think of Abu Ghraib and the abuse of
prisoners there. We think of that
terrible military mistake and the
consequences it [music] had. Mhm. And
no matter what is to come in this war in
Iran,
the killing of the school children,
the [music] mistaken targeting of a
school by the US military
is going to color how we look at it.
>> [music]
>> Well, Julian, I appreciate your time.
Thank [music] you. Thank you.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
[music]
On the 12th day of the war, Israel's
bombardment of Lebanon intensified.
Israel's attacks aimed at Hezbollah,
which has fired rockets into Israel in
support of Iran, has killed [music] more
than 600 people and displaced more than
800,000,
according to Lebanese officials.
>> [music]
>> In Iran, The Times reports that the
country's new supreme leader, Mojtaba
Khamenei, has [music] yet to make a
public appearance, in part because he
was wounded during the opening days
[music] of attacks by the US and Israel.
Meanwhile, with the Strait of Hormuz
still closed [music] to most shipping,
oil prices rose again on Wednesday. That
was despite a pledge by the 32 countries
of the International Energy Agency
[music]
to release 400 million barrels of oil
from their strategic reserve.
>> [music]
>> It was the largest release in the
agency's history.
It was the [music] latest economic
disruption from the war.
On Wednesday, Iran struck three
commercial ships around the Strait of
Hormuz, and several major banks,
including [music] City and HSBC, said
they would temporarily close their
offices [music] in the Persian Gulf out
of fear for the safety of their workers.
>> [music]
>> Today's episode was produced by Shannon
Lynn and Michael [music] Simon Johnson.
It was edited by Patricia Williams and
Paige Cowett, contains music by Roemi
Mesto and Sophia Landman. Our theme
music is by Wonderly. This episode was
engineered by Alyssa Mozley.
>> [music]
>> That's it for The Daily.
I'm Michael Barbaro.
See you tomorrow.